BlobVM (#871)
ava-labs/avalanche-docs: docs/subnets/introduction-to-vm.md

# Introduction to Virtual Machines

## Overview

This is part of a series of tutorials for building a Virtual Machine (VM):

- Introduction to Virtual Machines (this article)
- [How to Build a Simple VM](./create-a-virtual-machine-vm.md)
- [How to Build a Complex VM](./create-a-vm-blobvm.md)

A Virtual Machine is a blueprint for a blockchain and a blockchain instantiates from a VM, very much similar to a class-object relationship. A Virtual Machine can define following: issuance of transactions, transaction types, block structure, block building algorithm, keeping pending transactions in the mempool, gossiping transactions to the connected nodes, etc.

## Blocks and State

Virtual Machines can be broken down into 2 components: blocks and state. The functionality provided by VMs is to:

- Define the representation of a blockchain's state
- Represent the operations in that state
- Apply the operations in that state

Each block in the blockchain contains a set of state transitions. Each block is applied in order from the blockchain's initial genesis block to its last accepted block to reach the latest state of the blockchain.

## Blockchain

> A blockchain has 2 components: **Consensus Engine** and **Virtual Machine**. VMs mainly deal with the implementation related to the block's structure: building and parsing. The Consensus Engine helps in reaching consensus on the block built by the VM. Here is a brief overview:

Reviewer: Do you have a circular definition? A VM can initiate multiple blockchains. Here we say `A blockchain has 2 components: **Consensus Engine** and **Virtual Machine**.`. We need a better explanation.

Author: Can we use this - 

A blockchain relies on 2 components: **Consensus Engine** and **Virtual Machine**. VM is the blueprint for a blockchain that mainly deals with...

Reviewer: Sounds good to me.

## How to Load a VM

VMs are created as a module, whose binary is registered by a node running `AvalancheGo`, against the **vmID** (binary file name must be vmID). VMID is a string that is zero-extended to a 32-byte array and encoded in CB58.

In order to load a VM, its binary must be put it the proper place where `AvalancheGo` can find and load it. See [here](../nodes/maintain/avalanchego-config-flags.md#--build-dir-string) for more details. There could be multiple VM plugins in this directory.

A VM can be initialized as blockchains. A blockchain can run as a separate process from AvalancheGo and can communicate with `AvalancheGo` over gRPC. This is enabled by `rpcchainvm`, a special VM that uses [`go-plugin`](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/hashicorp/go-plugin) and wraps another VM implementation. The C-Chain, for example, runs the [Coreth](https://github.com/ava-labs/coreth) VM in this fashion.

### API Handlers

We interact with a blockchain and underlying VM through API handlers. Specifically, these handlers are implemented as **Services**.

> Handlers serve the response for the incoming HTTP requests; and handlers can also be wrapped with **gRPC** for efficiently making calls from other services such as `AvalancheGo`. VM implements 2 kinds of handlers:

Reviewer: `with **gRPC** for efficiently making calls from other services` or `with **gRPC** for efficiently responding to calls from other services` ?

Author: How about this - 

with **gRPC** for efficiently communicating with other services...

Reviewer: OK. For my understanding, are Handlers making call to or being called from other services?

Author: AFAIK, handlers are being called from other services (here avalanchego)

> # Introduction to Virtual Machines

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# Introduction to VMs
```

## Overview

> This is part of a series of tutorials for building a Virtual Machine (VM):
> 
> - Introduction to Virtual Machines (this article)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is part of a series of tutorials for building a Virtual Machine (VM):

- Introduction to VMs (this article)
```

- [How to Build a Simple VM](./create-a-virtual-machine-vm.md)
- [How to Build a Complex VM](./create-a-vm-blobvm.md)

A Virtual Machine is a blueprint for a blockchain and a blockchain instantiates from a VM, very much similar to a class-object relationship. A Virtual Machine can define following: issuance of transactions, transaction types, block structure, block building algorithm, keeping pending transactions in the mempool, gossiping transactions to the connected nodes, etc.

## Blocks and State

Virtual Machines can be broken down into 2 components: blocks and state. The functionality provided by VMs is to:

- Define the representation of a blockchain's state
- Represent the operations in that state
- Apply the operations in that state

Each block in the blockchain contains a set of state transitions. Each block is applied in order from the blockchain's initial genesis block to its last accepted block to reach the latest state of the blockchain.

> ## Blockchain

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

## Blockchain
```

> A blockchain has 2 components: **Consensus Engine** and **Virtual Machine**. VMs mainly deal with the implementation related to the block's structure: building and parsing. The Consensus Engine helps in reaching consensus on the block issued by VM. Here is a brief overview:

Reviewer 3: nit: the VM does not issue a block the consensus engine does. The VM tells the consensus engine when it's ready to build a block and then the consensus engine calls `BuildBlock()`.

> 1. A validator node wants to update the blockchain's state

Reviewer 3: A non-validator can produce a block as well.

> 2. It creates a block with state transition details in it

Reviewer 3: Can we improve the phrase state transition details?

Reviewer 3: We should be more specific with the subject of the sentence and never use something like `It`. We should be painfully specific here to make sure it's clear.

3. It issues the block to the consensus engine
4. Consensus engine gossips the block within the network to reach consensus on it
5. Depending upon the consensus results, the engine can either accept or reject the block
6. Every virtuous node on the network should have the same verdict for a particular block
7. It depends on the VM implementation on what to do with the accepted or rejected block

> The consensus engine has been already provided by `AvalancheGo` on the Avalanche network. Developers can implement and customize their own VM.

Reviewer 3: We should use the active voice as much as possible

```suggestion
AvalancheGo provides the consensus engine for every blockchain on the Avalanche Network. The consensus engine relies on the VM interface to handle building, parsing, and storing blocks as well as verifying and executing on behalf of the consensus engine.
```

## How to Load a VM

> VMs are created as a module, whose binary is registered by a node running `AvalancheGo`, against the **vmID** (binary file name must be vmID). VMID is a user-defined string that is zero-extended to a 32-byte array and encoded in CB58.

Reviewer 3: I guess this is true.. it's a 32 byte array that is cb58 encoded. It's not necessarily a user defined string although I suppose that's how we've used it. cc @StephenButtolph

> The Avalanche nodes that want to power their chains with a particular VM, must have the built binary put in the proper place. See [here](../nodes/maintain/avalanchego-config-flags.md#--build-dir-string) for more details. There could be multiple VM plugins in this directory.

Reviewer 3: Can we clean this sentence up?

> We can build multiple blockchains with the registered VM. A VM is registered, only when its built binary is present at the required location.

Reviewer 3: can we avoid the phrase `built binary` ? A lot of this phrasing is confusing.

> A blockchain can run as a separate process from AvalancheGo and can communicate with `AvalancheGo` over gRPC. This is enabled by `rpcchainvm`, a special VM that uses [`go-plugin`](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/hashicorp/go-plugin) and wraps another VM implementation. The C-Chain, for example, runs the [Coreth](https://github.com/ava-labs/coreth) VM in this fashion.

Reviewer 3: Note: we should state that rpcchainvm uses grpc. `go-plugin` relies on `grpc` and we're going to stop using `go-plugin` in the near future so might as well just say `grpc` instead.

### APIs for a VM

> We interact with a blockchain and underlying VM through **Static** and **Non-Static Handlers**. Handlers are used for making API calls to VM methods. Specifically, these handlers are implemented as **Services**.

Reviewer 3: Can we call them handlers and static handlers instead of static and non-static to coincide more directly with the function names on the VM?

I'm not a fan of calling them non-static as it makes static the default even though we barely use the static APIs.

Reviewer 3: We should explain what a handler is in one sentence or call them HTTP handlers to make it more clear. Handler is a very vague term that can mean a lot of things.

Reviewer: Can we distinguish handlers as blockchain handlers and VM handlers instead? Non-static handlers are only accessible on a blockchain, and static handlers on VM.

Author: Very nice. This sounds perfect to me ✌️.

Reviewer: And I agree with Aaron that we should just call them APIs.

### Handlers

> Handlers serve the response for the incoming HTTP requests. Handlers can also be wrapped with **gRPC** for efficiently making calls from other services such as `AvalancheGo`. Handlers help in creating APIs. VM implements 2 kinds of handlers:

Reviewer 3: Can we clean this paragraph up? I don't think the sentence `Handlers help in creating APIs` explains much.

- **Non-Static Handlers** - They help in interacting with blockchains instantiated by the VM. The API's endpoint will be different for different chains. `/ext/bc/[chainID]`
- **Static Handlers** - They help in directly accessing VM. These are optional for reasons such as parsing genesis bytes required to instantiate new blockchains. `/ext/vm/[vmID]`

> For any developers familiar with object-oriented programming, this is very similar to static and non-static methods on a class.

Reviewer 3: Great callout!

### VM Factory

> Each VM has a **factory** that is capable of creating new VM instances. A VM can be initialized as a blockchain along with handlers for accessing it, only when we have the VM's instance. The factory's `New` method shown below, returns the VM's instance to its caller in `AvalancheGo`. It's generally in the [`factory.go`](https://github.com/ava-labs/blobvm/blob/master/factory.go) file of the VM.

Reviewer 3: Can we re-phrase here? This is hard to follow.

```go
// Returning a new VM instance from VM's factory
func (f *Factory) New(*snow.Context) (interface{}, error) { return &vm.VM{}, nil }
```

### Initializing a VM

Blockchains are functional, only when the instantiated VMs are initialized and the node is bootstrapped. Initializing a VM involves setting up the database, block builder, mempool, genesis state, handlers, etc. This will expose the VM's API handlers, start accepting transactions, gossiping them across the network, building blocks, etc. More details on it can be found in the [third part](/subnets/create-a-vm-blobvm#initialize) of this series.

```go
if err := vm.Initialize(
    ctx.Context,
    vmDBManager,
    genesisData,
    chainConfig.Upgrade,
    chainConfig.Config,
    msgChan,
    fxs,
    sender,
);
```

You can refer to the [implementation](https://github.com/ava-labs/blobvm/blob/master/vm/vm.go#L92) of `vm.initialize` in the BlobVM repository.

### Interaction

We can use the API handlers to issue transactions, query chain state, and other functionalities provided by the VM.

## Interfaces

> The main task of a VM is to issue blocks to the consensus engine whenever requested. It is the VM's responsibility to handle user transactions, and include them into new blocks, mempool handling, and database handling.

Reviewer 3: I would not define this as the main task of the VM. The main task would be to verify blocks and handle accept/reject by performing the necessary state transitions.

> The main task of a VM is to issue blocks to the consensus engine whenever requested. It is the VM's responsibility to handle user transactions, and include them into new blocks, mempool handling, and database handling.

Reviewer 3: The main task of the VM is not to issue blocks to consensus, most VMs will not issue many blocks to consensus. The VM is responsible for parsing, storing, and building in no particular order and must also handle the verification and acceptance/rejecting of blocks and performing the corresponding state transitions.

> The consensus engine will just request the VM for new blocks whenever there is a signal (from VM) and according to other [congestion control mechanisms](https://github.com/ava-labs/avalanchego/blob/master/vms/proposervm/README.md), verify the block, gossip the block within the network for consensus, and request the VM to accept or reject the block.

Reviewer 3: This paragraph does not fit under the interfaces header.

The content can use some cleaning up as well. Can we try:

ChainVMs are wrapped within the [ProposerVM]((https://github.com/ava-labs/avalanchego/blob/master/vms/proposervm/README.md)) to provide a soft leader. When a VM is ready to build a block, it will add a message to the `toEngine` channel that was passed in when the VM was initialized. The ProposerVM will intercept this message and wait for the time when it is that node's turn to propose a block on the chain to forward that message to the consensus engine. When the consensus engine receives that message, it will trigger a call to `BuildBlock()` on the VM, so that the VM can build a block to be issued into consensus.

Once the VM has built a block, the consensus engine will call verify on the block, and then issue it into consensus. The consensus engine actively drives consensus and whenever a block has been decided, the engine will call Accept/Reject on the block.

## Blocks and State

Virtual Machines can be broken down into 2 components: blocks and state. The functionality provided by VMs is to:

- Define the representation of a blockchain's state
- Represent the operations in that state
- Apply the operations in that state

Each block in the blockchain contains a set of state transitions. Each block is applied in order from the blockchain's initial genesis block to its last accepted block to reach the latest state of the blockchain.

## Blockchain

A blockchain has 2 components: **Consensus Engine** and **Virtual Machine**. VMs mainly deal with the implementation related to the block's structure: building and parsing. The Consensus Engine helps in reaching consensus on the block built by the VM. Here is a brief overview:

1. A node wants to update the blockchain's state
2. The node's VM will notify the consensus engine that it wants to update the state

> 3. Consensus engine will request the block from the VM with updates in it

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Consensus engine will request the block from the VM with updates
```

> 4. Consensus engine will verify the returned block. It will rely on VM's implementation of `verify()` method

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Consensus engine will verify the returned block and rely on VM's implementation of `verify()` method
```

> 5. Consensus engine will gossip the successfully verified blocks within the network to reach consensus on it

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Consensus engine will gossip the successfully verified blocks within the network to reach consensus on this block
```

6. Depending upon the consensus results, the engine can either accept or reject the block
7. Every virtuous node on the network should have the same verdict for a particular block

> 8. It depends on the VM implementation on what to do with the accepted or rejected block

Reviewer: Can you clarify what `it` is in this sentence?

- **Non-Static Handlers** - They help in interacting with blockchains instantiated by the VM. The API's endpoint will be different for different chains. `/ext/bc/[chainID]`
- **Static Handlers** - They help in directly accessing VM. These are optional for reasons such as parsing genesis bytes required to instantiate new blockchains. `/ext/vm/[vmID]`

For any developers familiar with object-oriented programming, this is very similar to static and non-static methods on a class.

### VM Factory

Each VM has a **factory** that is capable of creating new VM instances. A VM can be initialized as a blockchain along with handlers for accessing it, only when we have the VM's instance. The factory's `New` method shown below, returns the VM's instance to its caller in `AvalancheGo`. It's generally in the [`factory.go`](https://github.com/ava-labs/blobvm/blob/master/factory.go) file of the VM.

```go
// Returning a new VM instance from VM's factory
func (f *Factory) New(*snow.Context) (interface{}, error) { return &vm.VM{}, nil }
```

### Initializing a VM

> Blockchains are functional, only when the instantiated VMs are initialized and the node is bootstrapped. Initializing a VM involves setting up the database, block builder, mempool, genesis state, handlers, etc. This will expose the VM's API handlers, start accepting transactions, gossiping them across the network, building blocks, etc. More details on it can be found in the [third part](/subnets/create-a-vm-blobvm#initialize) of this series.

Reviewer: Should `This will expose the VM's API handlers` be changed to `This will expose the blockchain's API handlers` ?

- **VM Handlers** - They help in accessing VM directly. These are optional for reasons such as parsing genesis bytes required to instantiate new blockchains. The access path pattern is `/ext/vm/[vmID]`. In the VM code, they are referred as static handlers.

For any readers familiar with object-oriented programming, this is very similar to static and non-static methods on a class. Blockchain handlers are the methods on the object, blockchain in this case, while VM handlers are the methods on the class, VM.

### Instantiate a VM

Each VM has a **factory** that is to create new VM instances from which a blockchain can be initialized. The factory's `New` method as shown below, returns the VM's instance to its caller in `AvalancheGo`. It's generally in the [`factory.go`](https://github.com/ava-labs/blobvm/blob/master/factory.go) file of the VM.

```go
// Returning a new VM instance from VM's factory
func (f *Factory) New(*snow.Context) (interface{}, error) { return &vm.VM{}, nil }
```

### Initializing a VM to Create a Blockchain

> Blockchains are functional, only when the instantiated VMs are initialized and the node has been bootstrapped. Initializing a VM involves setting up the database, block builder, mempool, genesis state, handlers, etc. This will expose the VM's API handlers, start accepting transactions, gossiping them across the network, building blocks, etc. More details on it can be found in the [third part](./create-a-vm-blobvm.md#initialize) of this series.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Before a VM can run, AvalancheGo will initialize it by invoking its `Initialize` method. Here, the VM will bootstrap itself and sets up anything it requires before it starts running.

This might involve setting up its database, mempool, genesis state, or anything else the VM requires to run. For more information, see the [third part](./create-a-vm-blobvm.md#initialize) of this series.
```

```go
if err := vm.Initialize(
    ctx.Context,
    vmDBManager,
    genesisData,
    chainConfig.Upgrade,
    chainConfig.Config,
    msgChan,
    fxs,
    sender,
);
```

You can refer to the [implementation](https://github.com/ava-labs/blobvm/blob/master/vm/vm.go#L92) of `vm.initialize` in the BlobVM repository.

> ### Interaction
> 
> We can use the API handlers to issue transactions, query chain state, and other functionalities provided by the blockchain.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> ### ProposerVM and Consensus Engine
> 
> ChainVMs are wrapped within the [ProposerVM](https://github.com/ava-labs/avalanchego/blob/master/vms/proposervm/README.md) to provide a soft leader. When a VM is ready to build a block, it will add a message to the `toEngine` channel that was passed in when the VM was initialized. The ProposerVM will intercept this message and wait for the time when it is that node's turn to propose a block on the chain to forward that message to the consensus engine. When the consensus engine receives that message, it will trigger a call to `BuildBlock()` on the VM, so that the VM can build a block to be issued into consensus.
> 
> Once the VM has built a block, the consensus engine will call verify on the block, and then issue it into consensus. The consensus engine actively drives consensus and whenever a block has been decided, the engine will call Accept/Reject on the block.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

## Interfaces

> As stated before, the VM is responsible for parsing, storing, and building blocks (in no particular order) and must also handle the verification, acceptance/rejection of blocks and performing the corresponding state transitions.
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Every VM should implement the following interfaces:

### `block.ChainVM`

> To reach a consensus on linear blockchains (as opposed to DAG blockchains), Avalanche uses the Snowman consensus engine. To be compatible with Snowman, a VM must implement the `block.ChainVM` interface, which can be accessed from [AvalancheGo repository](https://github.com/ava-labs/avalanchego/blob/master/snow/engine/snowman/block/vm.go).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To reach a consensus on linear blockchains, Avalanche uses the Snowman consensus engine. To be compatible with Snowman, a VM must implement the `block.ChainVM` interface. For more information, see [here](https://github.com/ava-labs/avalanchego/blob/master/snow/engine/snowman/block/vm.go).
```

	common.VM
	Getter
	Parser

	// Attempt to create a new block from data contained in the VM.
	//
	// If the VM doesn't want to issue a new block, an error should be
	// returned.
	BuildBlock() (snowman.Block, error)

	// Notify the VM of the currently preferred block.
	//
	// This should always be a block that has no children known to consensus.
	SetPreference(ids.ID) error

	// LastAccepted returns the ID of the last accepted block.
	//
	// If no blocks have been accepted by consensus yet, it is assumed there is
	// a definitionally accepted block, the Genesis block, that will be
	// returned.
	LastAccepted() (ids.ID, error)
}

// Getter defines the functionality for fetching a block by its ID.
type Getter interface {
	// Attempt to load a block.
	//
	// If the block does not exist, an error should be returned.
	//
	GetBlock(ids.ID) (snowman.Block, error)
}

// Parser defines the functionality for fetching a block by its bytes.
type Parser interface {
	// Attempt to create a block from a stream of bytes.
	//
	// The block should be represented by the full byte array, without extra
	// bytes.
	ParseBlock([]byte) (snowman.Block, error)
}
```

### `common.VM`

> `common.VM` is a type that every `VM`, whether a DAG or linear chain, must implement.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`common.VM` is a type that every `VM` must implement.
```

> You can see the full file from [here.](https://github.com/ava-labs/avalanchego/blob/master/snow/engine/common/vm.go)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For more information, you can see the full file [here](https://github.com/ava-labs/avalanchego/blob/master/snow/engine/common/vm.go).
```

	// Creates the HTTP handlers for custom VM network calls.
	//
	// This exposes handlers that the outside world can use to communicate with
	// a static reference to the VM. Each handler has the path:
	// [Address of node]/ext/VM/[VM ID]/[extension]
	//
	// Returns a mapping from [extension]s to HTTP handlers.
	//
	// Each extension can specify how locking is managed for convenience.
	//
	// For example, it might make sense to have an extension for creating
	// genesis bytes this VM can interpret.
	CreateStaticHandlers() (map[string]*HTTPHandler, error)

	// Creates the HTTP handlers for custom chain network calls.
	//
	// This exposes handlers that the outside world can use to communicate with
	// the chain. Each handler has the path:
	// [Address of node]/ext/bc/[chain ID]/[extension]
	//
	// Returns a mapping from [extension]s to HTTP handlers.
	//
	// Each extension can specify how locking is managed for convenience.
	//
	// For example, if this VM implements an account-based payments system,
	// it have an extension called `accounts`, where clients could get
	// information about their accounts.
	CreateHandlers() (map[string]*HTTPHandler, error)
}
```

### `snowman.Block`

> You may have noticed the `snowman.Block` type referenced in the `block.ChainVM` interface. It describes the methods that a block must implement to be a block in a linear (Snowman) chain.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `snowman.Block` interface It define the functionality a block must implement to be a block in a linear Snowman chain.
```

> Let’s look at this interface and its methods. You can see the full file from [here.](https://github.com/ava-labs/avalanchego/blob/master/snow/consensus/snowman/block.go)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For more information, you can see the full file [here](https://github.com/ava-labs/avalanchego/blob/master/snow/consensus/snowman/block.go).
```

// order. Specifically, if Verify is called, then the parent has already been
// verified. If Accept is called, then the parent has already been accepted. If
// Reject is called, the parent has already been accepted or rejected.
//
// If the status of the block is Unknown, ID is assumed to be able to be called.
// If the status of the block is Accepted or Rejected; Parent, Verify, Accept,
// and Reject will never be called.
type Block interface {
    choices.Decidable

    // Parent returns the ID of this block's parent.
    Parent() ids.ID

    // Verify that the state transition this block would make if accepted is
    // valid. If the state transition is invalid, a non-nil error should be
    // returned.
    //
    // It is guaranteed that the Parent has been successfully verified.
    Verify() error

    // Bytes returns the binary representation of this block.
    //
    // This is used for sending blocks to peers. The bytes should be able to be
    // parsed into the same block on another node.
    Bytes() []byte

    // Height returns the height of this block in the chain.
    Height() uint64
}
```

### `choices.Decidable`

> This interface is the superset of every decidable object, such as transactions, blocks, and vertices. You can see the full file from [here.](https://github.com/ava-labs/avalanchego/blob/master/snow/choices/decidable.go)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This interface is a superset of every decidable object, such as transactions, blocks, and vertices. For more information, you can see the full file [here](https://github.com/ava-labs/avalanchego/blob/master/snow/choices/decidable.go).
```

```go title="/snow/choices/decidable.go"
// Decidable represents element that can be decided.
//
// Decidable objects are typically thought of as either transactions, blocks, or
// vertices.
type Decidable interface {
	// ID returns a unique ID for this element.
	//
	// Typically, this is implemented by using a cryptographic hash of a
	// binary representation of this element. An element should return the same
	// IDs upon repeated calls.
	ID() ids.ID

	// Accept this element.
	//
	// This element will be accepted by every correct node in the network.
	Accept() error

	// Reject this element.
	//
	// This element will not be accepted by any correct node in the network.
	Reject() error

	// Status returns this element's current status.
	//
	// If Accept has been called on an element with this ID, Accepted should be
	// returned. Similarly, if Reject has been called on an element with this
	// ID, Rejected should be returned. If the contents of this element are
	// unknown, then Unknown should be returned. Otherwise, Processing should be
	// returned.
	Status() Status
}
```

> ## rpcchainvm

Reviewer 2: This seems like duplicate from the earlier rpcchainvm section

```

A VM's functionality is exposed to `AvalancheGo` by registering its factory and [instantiating](https://github.com/ava-labs/avalanchego/blob/master/chains/manager.go#L399) a new VM using this factory whenever a chain is required to be built.

```go
// Instantiating a new VM from its factory in avalanchego
func (m *manager) buildChain(chainParams ChainParameters, sb Subnet) (*chain, error) {
    ...
    vmFactory, err := m.VMManager.GetFactory(vmID)
    vm, err := vmFactory.New(ctx.Context)
    ...
}
```

### Initializing a VM

Blockchains are functional, only when the instantiated VMs are initialized and the node is bootstrapped. Initializing a VM involves setting up the database, block builder, mempool, genesis state, handlers, etc. This will expose the VM's API handlers, start accepting transactions, gossiping them across the network, building blocks, etc. More details on it can be found [later](#Initialize) in the documentation.

```go
if err := vm.Initialize(
    ctx.Context,
    vmDBManager,
    genesisData,
    chainConfig.Upgrade,
    chainConfig.Config,
    msgChan,
    fxs,
    sender,
);
```

> You can refer to the [implementation](https://github.com/ava-labs/blobvm/blob/master/vm/vm.go#L92) of `vm.initialize` in the BlobVM repository.

Reviewer: I would be helpful to provide the link to `vm.initialize` in the BlobVM repository?

Author: Have referenced it in the `implementation` hyperlink.

	// [Address of node]/ext/VM/[VM ID]/[extension]
	//
	// Returns a mapping from [extension]s to HTTP handlers.
	//
	// Each extension can specify how locking is managed for convenience.
	//
	// For example, it might make sense to have an extension for creating
	// genesis bytes this VM can interpret.
	CreateStaticHandlers() (map[string]*HTTPHandler, error)

	// Creates the HTTP handlers for custom chain network calls.
	//
	// This exposes handlers that the outside world can use to communicate with
	// the chain. Each handler has the path:
	// [Address of node]/ext/bc/[chain ID]/[extension]
	//
	// Returns a mapping from [extension]s to HTTP handlers.
	//
	// Each extension can specify how locking is managed for convenience.
	//
	// For example, if this VM implements an account-based payments system,
	// it have an extension called `accounts`, where clients could get
	// information about their accounts.
	CreateHandlers() (map[string]*HTTPHandler, error)
}
```

### `snowman.Block`

You may have noticed the `snowman.Block` type referenced in the `block.ChainVM` interface. It describes the methods that a block must implement to be a block in a linear (Snowman) chain.

> Let’s look at this interface and its methods. You can see the full file from [here.](https://github.com/ava-labs/avalanchego/blob/v1.7.4/snow/consensus/snowman/block.go)

Reviewer: Should the link to the master branch or v1.7.4 branch? If master branch, please search and replace in the doc.

### APIs for a VM

We interact with a blockchain and underlying VM through **Static** and **Non-Static Handlers**. Handlers are used for making API calls to VM methods. Specifically, these handlers are implemented as **Services**.

### Handlers

Handlers serve the response for the incoming HTTP requests. Handlers can also be wrapped with **gRPC** for efficiently making calls from other services such as `AvalancheGo`. Handlers help in creating APIs. VM implements 2 kinds of handlers:

- **Non-Static Handlers** - They help in interacting with blockchains instantiated by the VM. The API's endpoint will be different for different chains. `/ext/bc/[chainID]`
- **Static Handlers** - They help in directly accessing VM. These are optional for reasons such as parsing genesis bytes required to instantiate new blockchains. `/ext/vm/[vmID]`

For any developers familiar with object-oriented programming, this is very similar to static and non-static methods on a class.

> ### Registering a VM

Reviewer 2: I think this was mentioned in a previous comment but I think this is info that's beyond the scope of this doc. We don't need to go into internals on how vms are registered/rpc calls/etc. People reading this doc are just trying to understand what VMs are/how to build one + install it.

    ...
    m.factories[vmID] = factory
    ...
}
```

### Instantiating a VM

Each VM has a **factory** that is capable of creating new VM instances. A VM can be initialized as a blockchain along with handlers for accessing it, only when we have the VM's instance. The factory's `New` method shown below, returns the VM's instance to its caller in `AvalancheGo`. It's generally in the [`factory.go`](https://github.com/ava-labs/blobvm/blob/master/factory.go) file of the VM.

```go
// Returning a new VM instance from VM's factory
func (f *Factory) New(*snow.Context) (interface{}, error) { return &vm.VM{}, nil }
```

A VM's functionality is exposed to `AvalancheGo` by registering its factory and [instantiating](https://github.com/ava-labs/avalanchego/blob/master/chains/manager.go#L399) a new VM using this factory whenever a chain is required to be built.

```go
// Instantiating a new VM from its factory in avalanchego
func (m *manager) buildChain(chainParams ChainParameters, sb Subnet) (*chain, error) {
    ...
    vmFactory, err := m.VMManager.GetFactory(vmID)
    vm, err := vmFactory.New(ctx.Context)
    ...
}
```

> 

Reviewer 2: This is internal to `avalanchego`, and won't be something users/vm builders will need to touch. We can just let them know that the vm factory interface is used to build the vm for avalanche go to consume. We can remove this section.

	//
	// If the VM doesn't want to issue a new block, an error should be
	// returned.
	BuildBlock() (snowman.Block, error)

	// Notify the VM of the currently preferred block.
	//
	// This should always be a block that has no children known to consensus.
	SetPreference(ids.ID) error

	// LastAccepted returns the ID of the last accepted block.
	//
	// If no blocks have been accepted by consensus yet, it is assumed there is
	// a definitionally accepted block, the Genesis block, that will be
	// returned.
	LastAccepted() (ids.ID, error)
}

// Getter defines the functionality for fetching a block by its ID.
type Getter interface {
	// Attempt to load a block.
	//
	// If the block does not exist, an error should be returned.
	//
	GetBlock(ids.ID) (snowman.Block, error)
}

// Parser defines the functionality for fetching a block by its bytes.
type Parser interface {
	// Attempt to create a block from a stream of bytes.
	//
	// The block should be represented by the full byte array, without extra
	// bytes.
	ParseBlock([]byte) (snowman.Block, error)
}
```

### `common.VM`

`common.VM` is a type that every `VM`, whether a DAG or linear chain, must implement.

> You can see the full file from [here.](https://github.com/ava-labs/avalanchego/blob/v1.7.4/snow/engine/common/vm.go)

Reviewer: should this link be to the master branch or v1.7.4? If master branch, please search and replace all v1.7.4.

	Accept() error

	// Reject this element.
	//
	// This element will not be accepted by any correct node in the network.
	Reject() error

	// Status returns this element's current status.
	//
	// If Accept has been called on an element with this ID, Accepted should be
	// returned. Similarly, if Reject has been called on an element with this
	// ID, Rejected should be returned. If the contents of this element are
	// unknown, then Unknown should be returned. Otherwise, Processing should be
	// returned.
	Status() Status
}
```

## rpcchainvm

`rpcchainvm` is a special VM that wraps a `block.ChainVM` and allows the wrapped blockchain to run in its own process separate from AvalancheGo. `rpcchainvm` has two important parts: a server and a client. The [server](https://github.com/ava-labs/avalanchego/blob/master/vms/rpcchainvm/vm_server.go) runs the underlying `block.ChainVM` in its own process and allows the underlying VM's methods to be called via gRPC. The [client](https://github.com/ava-labs/avalanchego/blob/master/vms/rpcchainvm/vm_client.go) runs as part of `AvalancheGo` and makes gRPC calls to the corresponding server in order to update or query the state of the blockchain.

> To make things more concrete: suppose that `AvalancheGo` wants to retrieve a block from a chain run in this fashion. `AvalancheGo` calls the client's `GetBlock` method, which makes a gRPC call to the server, which is running in a separate process. The server calls the underlying VM's `GetBlock` method and serves the response to the client, which in turn gives the response to `AvalancheGo`.

Reviewer 2: inline with previous comments I don't think this section is necessary

Author: This might be a little information that is cool to share, on how AvalancheGo can interact with the VM irrespective of its programming language.

Reviewer 3: I agree this is valuable to include. Can we break this down into a step by step instead of a paragraph form to make it easier to follow?
